scientists are now discovering that some
of us possess a heightened biological
defense mechanism resulting in a more
emotionally sensitive more stress
reactive heart in Scotland a long term
population study into the psychological
social and biological determinants of
ill health has finally discovered why
chronic diseases are largely a disease
of deprived communities whether you're
in the United States or in Europe or in
the UK or in Glasgow an expert in
vascular biochemistry professor Chris
Picard is the study's chief investigator
he has focused on an important social
pattern where our professors and retired
bankers live stroke and heart disease is
almost unknown those in the poorer areas
died 20 years earlier than those in the
more affluent areas and the main cause
of death is coronary heart disease
and although it's a country famous for
an artery-clogging diet it has little to
do with the chip the pint or the smoke
in the second half of the 20th century
Scotland experienced tragic economic and
social upheaval statistically this is
when their heart problems began the
right and heart disease in the 1950s is
strongly associated to the change in
socio-economic patterns and society the
1950s particularly in West Central
Scotland heavy industry collapsed and
the people that were left or Una's
killed and no hope of employment living
in communities that gradually
deteriorated and quality of life and so
on so that for 50 60 years who have had
communities that have been living with
hopelessness what we're looking at is
that there might be a common cause to
not only heart disease but also to a
negative mental aspect the study is now
testing this hypothesis that heart
disease could be caused by the unhappy
emotional experience of growing up in
poverty when we were designing the study
we said to ourselves what we need to do
is to recruit from the affluent and
deprived parts of town about 300 350
people which would be enough to test
things like how much vascular disease
did they have in the carotid arteries
what were their Bloods like did they
have high levels of inflammatory factors
also the psychological profile can you
make sense of the world around you the
things distress you and therefore do you
have a super response to distressing
elements or do you deal with it quite
calmly the data gathered so far is
strong enough to draw some early
conclusions
the pathology goes bad early life
experiences or adverse conditions as an
adult you have a more aggressive
inflammatory condition in your body and
that manifests itself as heart disease
a whole generation of Scots has been
born into deprived stressful even
dangerous conditions their inflammatory
defense mechanisms have been activated
early and have stayed active it has hurt
their hearts deeply chaotic
circumstances difficult families seems
to send signals to baby's brains to
suggest that well the wonders are
slightly dangerous place out there
therefore you need to enlarge the
centers of the brain that are associated
with the stress response
[Music]
Scotland's long-term population studies
combined with advances in psycho biology
are redefining core beliefs about the
human heart that at the very least it is
an organ sensitive and reactive to our
emotions one that in a sense has
feelings
you